# Synchronizing Side-Effects

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/02.md`

## Background

`React.useEffect` is a built-in hook that allows you to run some custom code
after React renders (and re-renders) your component to the DOM. It accepts a
callback function which React will call after the DOM has been updated:

```javascript
React.useEffect(() => {
  // your side-effect code here.
  // this is where you can make HTTP requests or interact with browser APIs.
})
```

`useState` is for managing our react component state and `useEffect` is for
synchronizing the our react component state with the everything outside our
react components.

For example, things outside our react components include:

- Remote server requests
- Browser APIs like local storage/document title/media devices/etc.
- Integrations with non-react code

Feel free to take a look at `src/examples/hook-flow.png` if you're interested in
the timing of when your functions are run. This will make more sense after
finishing the exercises/extra credit/instruction.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/02.tsx)
- [Final](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.tsx)

In this exercise, we're going to enhance our `<UsernameForm />` component to get
its initial state value from localStorage (if available) and keep localStorage
updated as the `username` is updated.

## Extra Credit

### 1. ðŸ’¯ lazy state initialization

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.extra-1.tsx)

Right now, every time our component function is run, our function reads from
localStorage. This is problematic because it could be a performance bottleneck
(reading from localStorage can be slow). And what's more we only actually need
to know the value from localStorage the first time this component is rendered!
So the additional reads are wasted effort.

To avoid this problem, React's useState hook allows you to pass a function
instead of the actual value, and then it will only call that function to get the
state value when the component is rendered the first time. So you can go from
this: `React.useState(someExpensiveComputation())` To this:
`React.useState(() => someExpensiveComputation())`

And the `someExpensiveComputation` function will only be called when it's
needed!

Make the `React.useState` call use lazy initialization to avoid a performance
bottleneck of reading into localStorage on every render.

> Learn more about
> [lazy state initialization](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/use-state-lazy-initialization-and-function-updates)

### 2. ðŸ’¯ effect dependencies

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.extra-2.tsx)

Add this log right before calling `window.localStorage.setItem`:

```tsx
console.log(`updating local storage with "${username}"`)
```

Then, refresh the page and without touching anything else, click the submit
button. You should notice that this is logged twice:
`updating local storage with ""`. That's once for the initial run, and again for
the `setTouched` state update that happens when we click the submit button.
We're updating local storage unnecessarily!

The callback we're passing to `React.useEffect` is called after _every_ render
of our component (including re-renders). This is exactly what we want because we
want to make sure that the `username` is saved into localStorage whenever it
changes, but there are various reasons a component can be re-rendered (for
example, when a parent component in the application tree gets re-rendered, or if
our own internal state gets updated, like the `showError` state).

Really, we _only_ want localStorage to get updated when the `username` state
actually changes. It doesn't need to re-run any other time. Luckily for us,
`React.useEffect` allows you to pass a second argument called the "dependency
array" which signals to React that your effect callback function should be
called when (and only when) those dependencies change. So we can use this to
avoid doing unnecessary work!

Add a dependencies array for `React.useEffect` to avoid the callback being
called too frequently. After you add the dependency array, you'll notice the log
only is called once ðŸ˜„

### 3. ðŸ’¯ custom hook

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.extra-3.tsx)

The best part of hooks is that if you find a bit of logic inside your component
function that you think would be useful elsewhere, you can put that in another
function and call it from the components that need it (just like regular
JavaScript). These functions you create are called "custom hooks".

Create a custom hook called `useLocalStorageState` for reusability of all this
logic.

ðŸ¦‰ Note: you're in control of the arguments and return value of your custom
hook, there are no rules. Just like regular functions. Cool huh?

ðŸ’° For my solution, the end result allows people to use it like this:

```tsx
const [username, setUsername] = useLocalStorageState(
  'username',
  initialUsername,
)
```

This allows people to swap between `React.useState` and `useLocalStorageState`
pretty easily.

ðŸ¦º If you struggle on how to type the return value of your `useLocalStorage`
hook, check
[Wrapping React.useState with TypeScript](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/wrapping-react-use-state-with-type-script).

### 4. ðŸ’¯ flexible localStorage hook

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.extra-4.tsx)

Take your custom `useLocalStorageState` hook and make it generic enough to
support any data type (remember, you have to serialize objects to strings... use
`JSON.stringify` and `JSON.parse`). Note: this one's a bit of a challenge, but
have fun with it!

ðŸ¦‰ NOTE: So far, we've been saving the string as-is. Now we're making our custom
hook support any data type (number/boolean/etc). This means that we'll be
serializing it and that means that strings will be set to `"string value"`
rather than simply `string value`. So I recommend you clear your devtools local
storage value when you implement your changes (or even better, add support for
what to do when deserialization fails).

## Notes

If you'd like to learn more about when different hooks are called and the order
in which they're called, then open up `src/examples/hook-flow.png` and
`src/examples/hook-flow.js`. Play around with that a bit and hopefully that will
help solidify this for you. Note that understanding this isn't absolutely
necessary for you to understand hooks, but it _will_ help you in some situations
so it's useful to understand.

> PLEASE NOTE: there was a subtle change in the order of cleanup functions
> getting called in React 17:
> https://github.com/kentcdodds/react-hooks/issues/90

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%8E%A3&e=02%3A%20Synchronizing%20Side-Effects&em=).
