# 03 - Counter: useEffect

`React.useEffect` is a built-in hook that allows you to run some custom code
after React renders (and re-renders) your component to the DOM. It accepts a
callback function which React will call after the DOM has been updated:

```javascript
React.useEffect(() => {
  // your side-effect code here.
  // this is where you can make HTTP requests or interact with browser APIs.
})
```

## Notes for 💯

> Don't bother reading this until you get to the extra credit

There are two optimizations we want to make for this component:

### `React.useState`: lazy initialization

`React.useState`: Right now, every time our component function is run, our
function reads from localStorage. This is problematic because it could be a
performance bottleneck (reading from localStorage can be slow). And what's more
we only actually need to know the value from localStorage the first time this
component is rendered! So the additional reads are wasted effort.

To avoid this problem, React's useState hook allows you to pass a function
instead of the actual value, and then it will only call that function to get the
state value when the component is rendered the first time. So you can go from
this: `React.useState(someExpensiveComputation())` To this:
`React.useState(() => someExpensiveComputation())`

And the `someExpensiveComputation` function will only be called when it's
needed!

### `React.useEffect`: Conditionally firing an effect

`React.useEffect`: The callback we're passing to `React.useEffect` is called
after _every_ render of our component (including re-renders). This is exactly
what we want because we want to make sure that the count is saved into
localStorage whenever it changes, but there are various reasons a component can
be re-rendered (for example, when a parent component in the application tree
gets re-rendered).

Really, we _only_ want localStorage to get updated when the `count` state
actually changes. It doesn't need to re-run any other time. Luckily for us,
`React.useEffect` allows you to pass a second argument called the "dependency array"
which signals to React that your effect callback function should be called when
(and only when) those dependencies change. So we can use this to avoid doing
unnecessary work!
