# Making HTTP requests with useEffect

## Background

HTTP requests are another common side-effect that we need to do in applications.
This is no different from the side-effects we need to apply to a rendered DOM or
when interacting with browser APIs like localStorage. In all these cases, we do
that within a `useEffect` hook callback. This hook allows us to ensure that
whenever certain changes take place, we apply the side-effects based on those
changes.

One important thing to note about the `useEffect` hook is that you cannot return
anything other than the cleanup function. This has interesting implications with
regard to async/await syntax:

```javascript
// this does not work, don't do this:
React.useEffect(async () => {
  const result = await doSomeAsyncThing()
  // do something with the result
})
```

The reason this doesn't work is because when you make a function async, it
automatically returns a promise (whether you're not returning anything at all,
or explicitly returning a function). This is due to the semantics of async/await
syntax. So if you want to use async/await, the best way to do that is like so:

```javascript
React.useEffect(() => {
  async function effect() {
    const result = await doSomeAsyncThing()
    // do something with the result
  }
  effect()
})
```

This ensures that you don't return anything but a cleanup function.

🦉 I find that it's typically just easier to extract all the async code into a
utility function which I call and then use the promise-based `.then` method
instead of using async/await syntax:

```javascript
React.useEffect(() => {
  doSomeAsyncThing().then(result => {
    // do something with the result
  })
})
```

But how you prefer to do this is totally up to you :)

## Exercise

In this exercise, we'll be doing data fetching directly in a useEffect hook
callback within our component.

Here we have a form where users can enter the name of a pokemon and fetch data
about that pokemon. Your job will be to create a component which makes that
fetch request.

## Extra Credit

### 💯 store the state in an object

You'll notice that we're calling a bunch of state updaters in a row. It'd be
nice to just put all that state in one object so we only have to call one
function to update all the state at once.

In the future, you'll learn about how `useReducer` can solve this problem really
elegantly, but we can still accomplish this by storing our state as an object
that has all the properties of state we're managing.

See if you can figure out how to store all of your state in a single object with
a single `React.useState` call.
