# 07 - Avoid unnecessary re-renders with React.memo

Typically you don't need to do much for your app to be fast with React. I've
been writing React apps since 2015 and I've never once needed to use the
optimizations that React exposes.

However, sometimes, rendering and re-rendering certain components can be
computationally expensive for one reason or another. When that's the case, you
can use some of React's optimization APIs:
https://reactjs.org/docs/optimizing-performance.html

With class components you could use `shouldComponentUpdate` and `PureComponent`
to avoid rendering unnecessarily. For function components you can use
`React.memo` which is a function you call and pass your component function. It
returns a special component which will only re-render when its props change. For
example:

```javascript
function FavoriteNumber({number}) {
  return <div>My favorite number is {number}</div>
}

function App() {
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const increment = () => setCount(c => c + 1)
  return (
    <div>
      <button onClick={increment}>{count}</button>
      <FavoriteNumber number={4} />
    </div>
  )
}

ReactDOM.render(<App />, document.getElementById('root'))
```

With this setup, the `FavoriteNumber` component can only ever be re-rendered
when App is re-rendered, and that will only happen when `setCount` is called.
But rendering `FavoriteNumber` over and over again is unnecessary because the
`number` prop never changes (it's hardcoded to 4), so there's really no reason
to call that function.

Let's pretend that `FavoriteNumber` was doing something computationally
expensive and we wanted to only have it re-render when the `number` prop
changed. React has this use-case built in via React.memo:

```javascript
const FavoriteNumber = React.memo(function FavoriteNumber({number}) {
  return <div>My favorite number is {number}</div>
})
```

With that simple change, now the `FavoriteNumber` component will never be
re-rendered (unless the props change).

📜 Read more about `React.memo` here:
https://reactjs.org/docs/react-api.html#reactmemo
